Prologue

I was twenty-two when I first left our world. College came and went like the hello-goodbye of a romantic fling--leaving me a $120,000 slip of paper for my time, proof that I had read enough books and written enough essays to be marginally knowledgeable about English literature. Graduate school was apparently hard to get into, and the recession had eaten up any decent jobs. Someone asked me later why I left. I told him that I had always wanted to travel.

My father introduced me to the Interworld Exchange Program after my mother passed away. I was a senior at the time, sleeping through all the weekend phone calls from home, except for, ironically, that one. The funeral was a small one, black and dreary, containing a few family friends and siblings of my father. I had never asked about my mother's family before. And where had my father and mother met? All of these questions spilled out in those gray pre-winter days following the ceremony. My father had no words for me, but pulled out a weathered folder from his study and placed it in my hands. Inside resided a rubber-banded bundle of brochures laced with the musty scent of yellowed paper.

The summer after I graduated I rediscovered that folder while sifting through the mess of half-completed application forms that lay scattered on my bedroom floor. I found myself flipping through my father's odd catalog of foreign exchange programs. On a whim, I dialed the number listed on the front cover of an odd-shaped pamphlet. To my utmost surprise it rang through and a pleasant voice picked up: “Interworld Exchange Program, how may I help you?”

No less than two weeks later, I: found myself hefting a single suitcase up concrete stairs of a nondescript brick building. A wooden shingle in the yard groaned on its hinges, the displaying the large painted letters: ‘IWEP.’ I knocked on the door. There are times when you know something is a fantastic prank, but you play along, perhaps out of boredom, or perhaps because some part of you hopes that it is real.

Sensing the extra-dimensional lines that weave through the universes is a skill that most never bother to cultivate. You have probably felt the passing of another universe through ours without realizing it. That tightness that grips your chest suddenly, without reason. A restlessness, unease in your limbs. All these sensations are but vague shadows on the wall. To actually learn transworld shifting someone else must drag you out of your limited experience.

The actual travel between worlds is entirely uncomfortable. Like traveling along a rope threaded through your chest. I’ve heard some boast that they’ve grown used to it. That sounds as likely to me as someone easing to impalement by a spear. After my first shift I retched for a good twenty minutes on alien soil. The IWEP assured me that this was normal. After a dozen more practice shifts, I would be ready to meet my host family on Raznia.