## Chapter One: The Deathcolors of the Razni

The world of Raznia bears many similarities to our own. One might at first notice external differences such as the alien architectural style, or the unfamiliar shapes of road signs, but the core of Razni society agreed with my American upbringing: life, liberty, and land. They exercised the privateness of western Europe, preferring rural villas or the suburbs of medium-sized towns (such as Bar Kez, where I lived with my host-family). There are, however, a few notable metropolitan areas such as Tarneza and Kar Zin that have populations nearly the the size of Chicago. I would say that the Razni are a mite ahead of us technologically, but nothing like the biotech of the Irridise or the space-voyaging Memmeths. My host family drove an electrolytic automobile yet relied on landlines for audio communication.

The Razni themselves resemble people from our world except for their skin of soft moth-wing scales. From most distances they appear as pale-skinned humans; only under close inspection does one detect the glint of the minuscule plating on their outermost layer of skin. The scales are shed regularly so it is not uncommon to see a small trail of beige glitter flutter to the ground whenever a Razni scratches his arm. When cleaning my host family's kitchen I would daily sweep small heaps of these scales into my dustpan. (This might have disgusted me had I not heard long ago that 80% of household dust on Earth is actually human skin.)

In contrast to the Interworld Exchange Program warnings on culture shock, I quickly eased into life on Raznia. I couldn't have asked for a better host family. I often wonder what they  first thought of the Earthen female they picked up in Kar Zin. I was welcomed warmly at the transworld platform; Mr. Sarrak grabbed my suitcase while his wife offered me a sort of bottled tea, as I was still nauseous from the transworld shifting. The Razni are known across the worlds as a hospitable, subdued people, and the Sarraks provided no exception. I never detected any offense when I had difficulty stomaching one of their foreign dishes, nor did they mind speaking slowly into my Pocket Translationary.

I spent my days escorting their two children, Dinni and Timtok, around Bar Kez. Timtok had tumdrum lessons twice a week, and swimming at the gymnasium every weekend. Dinni attended dance practice four times a week―she wanted to be a professional riff-dancer and join a troop after she graduated First School. Their parents gave me money to visit the grand tent markets on the weekends, where we would weave through the soft fabric hallways in search of toys for little Timtok and new outfits for Dinni. My host sister took it upon herself to augment my off-world wardrobe with the latest Razni styles. Sometimes she used her extra spending money to outfit me with one of  those fashionable long-sleeved tunics or asymmetrically cut skirts.

Timtok loved to steal my translationary and listen to the device spit back cheery English renderings of his toddler speech. I made the mistake of showing him the different language settings, and for a week he refused to give the translationary back, toting it around the house while it repeated his words in Zimba, French, and Kinnish. He picked up my English words faster than I learned them in Raz. The child had a knack for discerning what I had trouble expressing―perhaps because he could identify with this―and often spoke on my behalf. He fancied himself as my translator, which gave him even greater excuse to abduct my Pocket Translationary. 

Perhaps the most distinguishable feature of the Razni are the bright, luminescent colors they exhibit before they die. I first encountered this phenomenon when dropping Dinni off at the gymnasium for her dance lessons. On our way to the studio I spotted a man, shirtless and blue, playing a game of five-rings with his friends. His torso glistened like a sapphire, arms flashing in beautiful blue complexion as he cradled the ball in his stick and passed it to his companions. 
Dinni noticed my prolonged gaze and tugged me away. She hated being late to dance. We walked up the main staircase to the floor where the dance studio resided.
As best I could in Raz, I asked her why that man was color. She looked at me, curiously, until she seemed to remember that I was from off-world. 
“Because he's ramarza.” I checked the screen of my translationary. Because he's dying, she had said. 

Is he sick? I wanted to ask. But before the Pocket Translationary could scrounge up the word for “sick” Dinni had vanished through the glass door and into the dance studio.

That evening, I questioned my host father about the bright blue man. In the time proceeding a Razni's death, my host father explained, his scales will cycle through a bright series of colors―much a like leaf entering autumn. Razni call this time of dying, which lasts anywhere from four to ten weeks, the Colored Days. The average Razni will experience a sequential change through two to three deathcolors before arriving at their final deathcolor. The final deathcolor, though apparently random, bears a great amount of significance in Razni culture―akin to the way we draw special meaning from the last words of a dying person in our own world. For example, it is customary for the mourners at a funeral to wear the final deathcolor of their late loved one. I asked my host father whether deathcolors played any part in religious belief.

“There was a time, yes, there was a time when a great deal of superstition surrounded a person's final deathcolor. It was for a long time believed―in this country I should mention―that there were six different Planes, you see, one Plane for each deathcolor.”

I inquired about the “Six Gates” that form the basis of several Razni idioms. 

“Six Gates, Six Planes, Six Roads, Six Mansions―there are many different renditions. Anyhow, the idea goes that there were six different Planes, or 'Gates' as you've heard, in the afterlife. If you died red, then you went to the Red Plane, if your deathcolor was blue, then you went to the Blue Plane, and so on. There were different rankings for each plane as well, so the Blue and Green Planes were on the bottom, Yellow and Orange formed a middle tier, with Violet as the elite top. The Red Plane was the lowest rung, though the fundamentalists insisted that this was rather the Plane of Punishment, where the despicable were damned. I think because many artists die red, that's just my personal opinion. 
“This kind of thinking couldn't last forever, though, because there have been too many good people that died red and a few rather despicable ones with the coveted purple deathcolor.” “But that's only in our country,” he was keen to add. “I hear overseas in Trenor that there are not tiered planes, but rather 'Six Spheres of Eternal Splendor' or something of the sort. Yellow is Laughter, Red is Passion, Blue is Community, and so on.”

I asked him if he personally believed in any significance to one's deathcolor.

“No, no, I'm not terribly religious. Our science has gone and proven that one's final deathcolor is almost entirely random. There might be slight correlation between deathcolor and heredity or time of year, but for the most part you can't predict it. You can only wait and see.”

“What would you like your final deathcolor to be?”

“Other than violet―I mean, who doesn't wish for violet―I wouldn't mind a pleasant green. My alma mater's banner was green, and so is my favorite cocktail, the Tall Sage. Dad was a green, as was Marvek Hezel, the greatest poet of all time. Green would be a nice way to go.”

The time of a Razni's death appears to be set on some undetectable, yet predetermined schedule. There is no inclination as to when one's mortal clock will expire, other than when the splotches of vibrant deathcolor first appear. Most Razni live to be sixty or seventy before their deathcolors emerge, but there are always cases of colored infants, as well as lively, pale-skinned century-year olds, and everything in between. Razni don't grow sick and die the way people on our world do. In fact, I never heard any mention of pathological disease while on Raznia. Which is not to say that Razni only die upon their fate-prescribed time. Like in our world, accidents (and not always accidents) happen, and a Razni who has been suddenly killed will rapidly flicker through a series of deathcolors like an accelerated version of the Colored Days.

The Colored Days mark the period of time from the first appearance of deathcolors and one's departure. Perhaps the closest thing we have to the Colored Days on our world is a doctor's short sentence for a terminally ill patient. But even then, there's always some fragment of hope for a miracle. And that is a huge difference.

Until modern times, no Razni lived long after the appearance of deathcolors. The longest recorded endurance of the Colored Days occurred some three hundred years ago in the rural village of Kresh where an old widow managed to live a hundred and seventy-two days after the onset of her deathcolors. She died a deep blue, though some accounts insist that her final deathcolor was actually violet. The locals erected a monument in her honor, and it remains there today as a tourist destination. The Sarraks and I paid a brief visit to this marine-granite pillar as we drove through Kresh Country on our way to the Eastern Shores.

Colored Razni and their friends are usually quick to accept the onset of deathcolors. I suppose the absolute uncertainty of one's impending demise dissuades him from denial. My host mother once told me a story of an older woman at her work that had bleached her deathcolored scales daily so that her coworkers had no idea that she was in the midst of her Colored Days until she fell dead at her desk one afternoon. “But she was always a strange one,” said my host-mother. “She would do the weirdest things. Like show up to work in a raincoat on a sunny day. Or rebraid her hair every hour. Silly things like that. For as long as I knew her.”

Aside from the unusual cases, the Colored Days offer most Razni a time of reflection and especial closeness with their friends and family. Old feuds are quickly resolved or dropped, hidden love is professed, confessions are made. There are common Razni sayings like “love like your scales are blue” or “a grudge deeper than color” that allude to this heightened altruism of the Colored Days. It is not uncommon for a deathcolored Razni to leave his job and seek contemplative solitude for his last weeks alive. Some Razni act as if nothing in their life has changed and continue their day to day activities (like the blue man I saw in the gymnasium), strutting complacency in the face of death. 

For many artists, the onset of deathcolors beckons a new level of productivity and inspiration as inhibitions are shed and that absolute deadline draws near. “The best works are colored works,” said my host-father as he presented me with The Renton Anthology of Colored Works, 5th ed. during the Feast of Seasons. This collection has remained my most prized possession from Raznia, or any of the worlds I visited in later years. I think I've read the Orange Volume cover to cover at least a dozen times―so much that the binding is coming loose and the gold lettering is fading from its leather cover. I cannot count the many weekends spent with one of those six volumes cracked open, accompanied only by a cup of tea and my trusty Pocket Translationary.

As I hinted earlier, modern medicine has made it possible to extend the Colored Days almost indefinitely. After Raznia opened up its borders to interworld travel several centuries ago, their peculiar deathcolors piqued the fascination of off-world scientists on more technologically advanced worlds, especially the scientists of that infamously meddlesome world, Camirea. The Camirean researchers devised a drug that could draw out the Colored Days, offering years, even decades to a Razni's life. They offered it to the Razni in a magnanimous show of charity, and then retracted in offense when the medication did not become widely adopted. 

The initial trials of the drug proved remarkably successful at prolonging the lives of Razni in full deathcolor, but not without consequence. Razni on the Camirean drug became regarded as a sort of living dead, as their bright scales paled to translucency over the years. The stigma only swelled with the speeches and rallies of fierce anti-Camieran opponents, such as Pronos Specta: “What offworld demons have condemned our brothers and sisters to this Camirean purgatory? What science seeks to drain the glory of our passing? Nay, my friends, this is the greatest work of evil our world has seen since the Viridian Massacre!” Needless to say the Camirean scientists were eventually expelled by governments across Raznia and their laboratories shut down. One can still find the Camirean drug on the black market, but there is relatively little demand save from a handful of fainthearted wealthy.

Who knows how long I might have stayed with the Sarraks had things turned out differently. My host family often remarked to their dinner guests that the Interworld Exchange Program accidentally assigned them a long lost relative. Two and a half years after they first showed me to my room, I was filling out paperwork and seeking references to upgrade my interworld visa to permanent residence permit. 

I passed the necessary Raz competency exams with the tremendous help of my little friend Timtok. His short, simple phrases were easy enough for me to understand, even without my translationary. One could always find us at the library while Dinni was at school, reading together from a stack of picture books. How amusing it must have been for the librarians to witness a toddler and twenty-four year-old reading struggling through the same books! 

When the library was closed I entertained Timtok with fairy tales from my own world. Not all of the stories translated perfectly―Cinderella's carriage had to be made out of rebesh, a type of Razni potato (since they had no pumpkins on Raznia), and “Little Red Riding Hood” was mistakenly named the rough Razni equivalent to “Ghetto Socialist Jockey of Small Stature” by my Pocket Translationary. But Timtok was too young to be offended by these absurdities, and I guess a potato carriage isn't any more absurd that a pumpkin one.

It was a spring morning, during the last remaining weeks of vacation before Dinni had to return to her classes at First School. My host mother and I, both habitual early birds, worked the kitchen, preparing that evening's dinner in the cool before sunrise. All the kitchen windows were heaved open, allowing the misty predawn breeze to waft away the heat of the kitchen. The sun weighs heavily on a southern town like Bar Kez, even in mid-spring. I opened the oven door for my host mother to remove a cheesy rebesh casserole. 
Just then, Timtok stumbled down the stairs and ran into the kitchen, face flush with excitement.

“Mom, mom, come see!” Before waiting for her to take the casserole out of the oven, he tore off his nightshirt, revealing that beautiful, unmistakable trail of ruby moth-scales spreading across his belly to his back, and underneath his armpits. My host mother calmly set the casserole on the stove before stooping to inspect her child's red blotched figure. She stared at him for a long moment then embraced her son tightly. A minute later she had returned to the casserole, searching her spice rack for herrek stems.

“Would you get Timtok a bowl of porridge?” she asked.

It was too much for me. Tears rolled down my cheeks as I set the porridge in front of my reddening friend. Both he and his mother stared at me with alien curiosity, wondering what had so deeply upset the foreigner. I tried to calm myself, but my God―every time I looked at him!

My host father walked into the kitchen and surveyed the situation. “Should I call a physician?” he asked. “Does the Interworld Embassy has an Earthen doctor on call?”

I frantically wiped my face with my sleeves. I told her I was fine. I was fine.

I retreated to my room.


The Colored Days began, and Timtok delighted in each molting of color. You couldn't get a shirt on him, and pants were also a struggle. He would trot his little frame around the house in his underwear, stopping frequently in front of mirrors to admire his sparkling body. His luminescent scales were the envy of his playmates; they rubbed his arms so that some of his colorful scales flaked onto their own skin. 

I was helping Timtok into a swimming suit when he asked me, abruptly, “What color do you want to be?” He held onto my shoulder as I pulled the trunks over his bottom, now fully green.

How could I explain to him the plainness in which people of my world die? I diverted, asked him what color he wanted.

“Orange!” he exclaimed. I forced a smile and told him I wanted to be orange, too.

He smiled. All dressed now, I scooped up the bright-scaled boy and carried him outside. His mother had set up a sprinkler and slide. Settling myself on the porch next Mrs. Sarrak, I watched Timtok and Dinni run under the arch of the sprinkler, trying to dodge its beams of spray. Timtok laughed and shouted with his sister as the torrent chased him down and splattered across his emerald back. He slid on his belly down the tarpaulin slide and then rolled in the dewy grass, amused at how well his green body blended with the wet blades. 

He departed five days later, a bright canary yellow. I wore my favorite yellow sun dress to his funeral. 

I did not stay on Raznia long after the procession. The Interworld Exchange Program informed me of a university on the aqueous world of Ecktuo that was seeking a Earthen female for their new world cultures program. As much as I loved my stay on Raznia, I could not pass up such an opportunity, I explained to them. The Sarraks understood and bid me an earnest farewell, reminding that I could visit them anytime, as often as I desired. I said that I would most definitely take them up on their offer, but I think we both knew otherwise.